[poster] Expanding Hubverse Evaluation Metrics and Dashboard Support (#34)
reichlab/decisions: project-posters/eval-metrics-expansion/eval-metrics-expansion.md

      ↓
hubPredEvalsData (R pkg)
  └── orchestrates scoring for a hub; reads predevals-config.yml;
      outputs scores.csv files organized by target/eval_set/disaggregate_by
      ↓
hubPredEvalsData-docker
  └── Docker container wrapping hubPredEvalsData::generate_eval_data();
      used in hub CI/CD pipelines
      ↓
predevals (JavaScript)
  └── client-side module that reads the scores CSV files and renders
      interactive tables, heatmaps, and line plots
```

Repos:
- [hubEvals](https://github.com/Infectious-Disease-Modeling-Hubs/hubEvals)
- [hubPredEvalsData](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData)
- [hubPredEvalsData-docker](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData-docker)
- [predevals](https://github.com/hubverse-org/predevals)

Documentation:
- [User guide](https://docs.hubverse.io/en/latest/user-guide/dashboards.html#predevals-evaluation-optional)
- [Developer guide (infrastructure)](https://docs.hubverse.io/en/latest/developer/dashboard-predevals.html)

- `hubEvals::score_model_out()` (v0.1.0) already supports `transform`, `transform_append`, and `transform_label`—no hubEvals changes needed for the scale transform pipeline.

> - scoringutils dev branch has `as_forecast_multivariate_sample()`, `variogram_score_multivariate()`, and `variogram_score_multivariate_point()`. (to be released by mid-March.)

Reviewer: I'm chasing up what is blocking our release to CRAN.

- **Issue #44 (human-readable target names)**: ~~Is [hubPredEvalsData#21](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData/issues/21) resolved? If not, #44 has an unresolved upstream dependency.~~ **Resolved**: Issue #21 is not resolved so there is an upstream dependency.
- **Issue #4 (default sort column)**: ~~Should this be configured in `predevals-config.yml` (schema change) or via a standalone predevals options object (JS only)?~~ **Resolved**: configure in `predevals-config.yml` as a schema change; included in Sprint B's v1.1.0 schema bump.
- **Which scoringutils metrics are already surfaceable?** For quantile forecasts, any metric in `scoringutils::get_metrics(scoringutils::example_quantile)` is already available via the existing `get_standard_metrics()` pathway — no schema or code changes needed, just config. For sample forecasts, once PR #103 merges, CRPS/bias/DSS/energy score become available the same way. New scoringutils defaults propagate automatically.

> - **What happens when hubs have multiple output types for the same target?** Sometimes, who output types might enable multiple scores to be shown, or the same score to be calculated in different ways. How do we support this? or allow users to specify which output-type to use when calculating metrics? or just set defaults for prioritizing one output-type over another? This may already happen for example if we have quantile with output_type_id == 0.50 (median) forecasts and point forecasts - they both could be used to compute point forecast metrics. 

Author: ```suggestion
- **What happens when hubs have multiple output types for the same target?** Sometimes, output types present in the data might enable multiple scores to be shown, or the same score to be calculated in different ways. How do we support this? or allow users to specify which output-type to use when calculating metrics? or just set defaults for prioritizing one output-type over another? This may already happen for example if we have quantile with output_type_id == 0.50 (median) forecasts and point forecasts - they both could be used to compute point forecast metrics. 
```

| [predevals#44](https://github.com/hubverse-org/predevals/issues/44) | Display `target_name` from `tasks.json` instead of `target_id` in dropdowns | hubPredEvalsData (depends on [#21](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData/issues/21)) + predevals JS |

> ⚠️ Issue #44 depends on upstream hubPredEvalsData work ([#21](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData/issues/21)). Include only if that work is complete.

**Scale transformation pipeline:**

The detailed implementation plan is in [hubPredEvalsData#34](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData/issues/34), which covers the schema design, config validation, R pipeline changes, and predevals JS behavior.

| Issue | Change | Where |
|-------|--------|-------|
| [predevals#30](https://github.com/hubverse-org/predevals/issues/30) | Refactor code for getting full metrics list (prerequisite for per-scale metric treatment) | predevals JS refactor |
| [hubPredEvalsData#34](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData/issues/34) | Add `transform_defaults` (top-level) and per-target `transform` override to config schema; wire through to `hubEvals::score_model_out()` | hubPredEvalsData schema + R pipeline |

> | — | When `append: true`, scores.csv gains a `scale` column; predevals treats each (metric × scale) combination as a distinct item in dropdowns and table columns | predevals JS |

Reviewer 2: We decided the output of hubPredEvalsData will be a wide table. So this is currently incorrect as there will be no `scale` column when `append: true`

3. How to wire it through hubPredEvalsData: add metric name to schema, `get_standard_metrics`, `get_metric_name_to_output_type`, config validation
4. How predevals reads scores CSVs — when new metrics appear automatically vs. when JS changes are needed
5. Worked example: sample-based scoring with compound_taskid_set end-to-end (referencing Sprints B + C as concrete prior art)

**End-user metric documentation** (builds on Sprint A #13):
- If not fully addressed in Sprint A, finalize a metric glossary embedded in predevals covering: WIS, ae_point, se_point, interval coverage, variogram score
- Hub-level task variable definitions handled separately (via hub model-output README, not in predevals)

**Deliverable**: New or extended hubDocs page; predevals minor release if glossary was deferred from Sprint A.

**Sprint D — Acceptance criteria:**
- A developer unfamiliar with the codebase can follow the guide to add a toy metric end-to-end without reading source across repos
- All metric names in the guide are present in the predevals JS glossary (#13)
- hubDocs CI passes

---

> ### Mini-Sprint E — hubverse ↔ scoringutils data connector

Reviewer 2: Glad we're going to implement this!

*Scope: Merge near-complete hubEvals PR, then wire sample scoring + compound_taskid_set awareness through hubPredEvalsData and predevals.*

This sprint builds pipeline support for sample-format output types that require [`compound_taskid_set`](https://docs.hubverse.io/en/latest/user-guide/sample-output-type.html#compound-modeling-tasks) awareness. 
The variogram score is the motivating use case, but the infrastructure enables any future compound/multivariate metric for sample forecasts. 
See also [hubDocs PR #439](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubDocs/pull/439) for incoming updates to compound modeling task documentation.

However, we will begin by assessing the feasibility and challenges of adding support for univariate sample scores vs. multivariate sample scores.
The first deliverable here will be to define a scope of which features to roll out and what the challenges will be with any of them. 
Example complexities are how/whether to handle multivariate sample scoring and how to treat compound_taskid_sets in the config files. 
Also, how/whether to handle clashes when/if multiple output_types can be used to compute the same score.

**hubEvals changes — mostly done:**

> [PR #103](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubEvals/pull/103) (branch `ak/sample-scoring/94`) is open and awaiting final review. It adds:

Reviewer 2: This has now been merged

- `transform_sample_model_out()` — converts hubverse sample format to scoringutils-compatible objects
- `"sample"` as a valid output type in `validate_output_type()`
- Marginal scoring (CRPS, bias, DSS) and compound/multivariate scoring (energy score) via `compound_taskid_set`
- Dynamically generates compound metric list from scoringutils — so variogram score will be picked up automatically once [scoringutils#1114](https://github.com/epiforecasts/scoringutils/issues/1114) lands and bumps the default metrics
- Requires scoringutils ≥ 2.1.2.9000

> - Open issues on the branch: [#99](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubEvals/issues/99) (NaN/Inf validation), [#100](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubEvals/issues/100) (test updates), [#101](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubEvals/issues/101) (compound_taskid_set validation), [#102](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubEvals/issues/102) (test warnings)

Reviewer 2: Issues 99 and 102 have been addressed

> **Action**: Review and merge PR #103; track scoringutils#1114 for variogram score availability.

Reviewer 2: PR 103 has been merged

- The variogram score is a multivariate proper scoring rule capturing spatial correlation—something WIS cannot measure—and scoringutils now supports it natively.
- The [existing developer guide](https://docs.hubverse.io/en/latest/developer/dashboard-predevals.html) covers infrastructure (Docker, build, testing) but not metric development workflow, making it hard for new contributors to add metrics end-to-end.

### What are we _not_ trying to do?

- Not adding new chart types (existing table/heatmap/line plot are sufficient).
- Not changing the existing WIS/AE/interval coverage metrics.
- Not implementing calibration/reliability diagram visualizations in this sprint.
- Not adding the variogram score for quantile-format forecasts (requires ensemble/sample format).

### How do we judge success?

- A first-time user reading the dashboard understands what WIS means, which direction is better, and which models are performing best—without leaving the page.
- A hub admin can configure log-scale evaluation in `predevals-config.yml` and see log-scaled metrics appear as distinct items alongside natural-scale metrics in all dropdowns and table columns.

> - A hub submitting sample-format ensemble forecasts can configure and view the variogram score in the dashboard.

Reviewer: point?

---

## ✅ Validation

### What do we already know?

- `hubEvals::score_model_out()` (v0.1.0) already supports `transform`, `transform_append`, and `transform_label`—no hubEvals changes needed for the scale transform pipeline.
- scoringutils dev branch has `as_forecast_multivariate_sample()`, `variogram_score_multivariate()`, and `variogram_score_multivariate_point()`.
- hubPredEvalsData schema versioning is established (v0.1.0 → v1.0.0 → v1.0.1); v1.1.0 is the natural target for transform + variogram + config-driven enhancements.
- The predevals JS dashboard builds via webpack into `dist/predevals.bundle.js`; the existing table/heatmap/line plot handle new metric columns without new chart types.
- predevals issues #31, #5, #42, #41, #49 are pure JS/CSS changes with no schema dependencies.

### What do we need to answer?

- **Variogram score in scoringutils**: [scoringutils#1114](https://github.com/epiforecasts/scoringutils/issues/1114) tracks adding `variogram_score_multivariate()` as a default compound metric. Confirm its merge status before closing Sprint D. hubEvals PR #103 is already wired to pick it up dynamically once it lands.

> - **How many active hubs submit `sample`-format forecasts?** This determines Sprint D's near-term impact. Although, note that the variogram point score could be used by almost all hubs, with some additional specification about joint across. It is possible that some specification would be needed for any variogram score to specify which dimension to assume the forecasts are joint across.

Reviewer: I would have thought having some flexibility for what dimesion to assume the forecasts are across is true of all the multivariate scores? Location seems like a reasonable one or location and horizon?

Author: agree, and addressed in latest release

> - **Variogram + disaggregate_by conflict**: If a target has `disaggregate_by: location` and also uses the variogram score (computed *across* locations), should hubPredEvalsData skip disaggregation silently, warn, or error?

Reviewer 3: I lean towards warn, but at least I think we shouldn't skip silently

Author: I agree!

- [ ] #27: Characterization tests written against existing sorting behaviour → refactored into helper → tests still pass. Must be merged before #4 is started
- [ ] #4: Issue refined to specify fallback behaviour when metric is absent → failing tests written (R: schema accepts/rejects new field; JS: initial sort matches config, falls back to alphabetical when field absent) → implemented
- [ ] **Before starting #44**: confirm [hubPredEvalsData#21](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData/issues/21) is resolved; skip #44 in this sprint if not
- [ ] #44 (if included): Issue refined to specify behaviour when `target_name` is missing from data → failing test written → implemented. Test uses fixture data with and without `target_name`
- [ ] R `testthat` tests cover new schema properties end-to-end through `generate_eval_data()`, written before config.R is modified
- [ ] Docker image rebuilt and integration test passes

---

### Mini-Sprint C — Scale transformation pipeline (~4 weeks)

> *Scope: hubPredEvalsData schema v1.1.0 additions + predevals JS for scale UI. hubEvals unchanged (transforms already implemented).*

Reviewer 2: This has already been fully scoped out yet the sprint doesn't mention the planning issue anywhere: https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData/issues/34

Author: 🙈 sorry for that omission. I've added it now.

**hubPredEvalsData changes:**
- Add `transform_defaults` (top-level) and per-target `transform` to `inst/schema/v1.1.0/config_schema.json`
- Allowed transform functions: `log_shift`, `sqrt`, `log1p`, `log`, `log10`, `log2`

> - `append: true/false` — when true, scores.csv gains a `scale` column (`"natural"` or transform label)

Reviewer 2: Given you want a wide table, It might be good to think through whether hubPredEvalsData should also output a wide table? This would make the table easier to present, not sure about the evals visualisation? Would be great to hear @matthewcornell 's thoughts on this

Reviewer 4: Sorry, I don't understand enough to answer yet. Is there a summary of the specific changes you're asking about? I haven't touched any of the score-loading/manipulating code in predevals at this point.

Author: I think we want to treat scores on a transformed scale as a separate score consistently throughout. This means, I think, treating it as a separate column, which will mean new columns in the tables and new variable names in menu selectors for the plots. So maybe this needs to be updated so that the scores.csv would return new columns for the transformed scores, not a new column for scale?

Author: @annakrystalli are you saying that hubPredEvalsData currently outputs a long table but that we might want to change it to output a wide table given the requirements that we want the eventual table to be displayed in wide format?

- No separate filter/toggle; scales are just more metrics
- Info banner when any transformed metrics are present
- **Note**: Sprint A's table ergonomics work ([#49](https://github.com/hubverse-org/predevals/issues/49) fixed column) should land before or alongside this sprint, since adding scale variants doubles the number of metric columns

**Deliverable**: hubPredEvalsData v1.1.0 schema, new predevals release, Docker rebuild. Resolves [hubPredEvalsData#34](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData/issues/34).

**Sprint C — Definition of Done:**
- [ ] Each behaviour below has its failing test written and merged to a test branch *before* the corresponding R or JS implementation is written
- [ ] R: `generate_eval_data()` with `transform_defaults: {function: log_shift, append: true}` produces `scores.csv` with both `scale = "natural"` and `scale = "log_shift"` rows
- [ ] R: config with an invalid transform function name fails `validate_config_transforms()` with a clear error message
- [ ] R: config applying a transform to a `pmf` target fails validation

> - [ ] R: per-target `transform: null` correctly overrides `transform_defaults` (hierarchical override)

Reviewer 2: This is incorrect. it should be transform: false
```suggestion
- [ ] R: per-target `transform: false` correctly overrides `transform_defaults` (hierarchical override)
```

- `transform_sample_model_out()` — converts hubverse sample format to scoringutils-compatible objects
- `"sample"` as a valid output type in `validate_output_type()`
- Marginal scoring (CRPS, bias, DSS) and compound/multivariate scoring (energy score) via `compound_taskid_set`
- Dynamically generates compound metric list from scoringutils — so variogram score will be picked up automatically once [scoringutils#1114](https://github.com/epiforecasts/scoringutils/issues/1114) lands and bumps the default metrics
- Requires scoringutils ≥ 2.1.2.9000
- Open issues on the branch: [#99](https://github.com/Infectious-Disease-Modeling-Hubs/hubEvals/issues/99) (NaN/Inf validation), [#100](https://github.com/Infectious-Disease-Modeling-Hubs/hubEvals/issues/100) (test updates), [#101](https://github.com/Infectious-Disease-Modeling-Hubs/hubEvals/issues/101) (compound_taskid_set validation), [#102](https://github.com/Infectious-Disease-Modeling-Hubs/hubEvals/issues/102) (test warnings)

**Action**: Review and merge PR #103; track scoringutils#1114 for variogram score availability.

**hubPredEvalsData changes** (extends v1.1.0 schema from Sprint C):

> - Add `joint_across` optional property to target config

Reviewer 2: We should stick to the hubverse argument names and concepts, i.e. the `compound_taskid_set` which is the inverse of `joint_across`.

- Add `"variogram_score"` as a recognized metric name for sample output types
- `R/utils-metrics.R` — add `sample = "variogram_score"` case in `get_standard_metrics()`
- `R/generate_eval_data.R` — extract and propagate `joint_across`; skip location-based disaggregation for sample metrics when `joint_across = "location"`

**predevals JS changes:**
- No new chart types; variogram score appears as another column in the overall scores table
- Graceful handling of missing metric columns in disaggregated views (may already work)

> ⚠️ **Scope constraint**: The variogram score is computed jointly across locations and is **not** disaggregable by location. Document this in the config schema and validation error messages.

**hubPredEvalsData-docker changes:**
- [docker#6](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData-docker/issues/6): Replace ad-hoc oracle data fetching with `hubData` tooling, so the container fetches oracle output through the standard hubverse data access layer rather than direct file paths

**Deliverable**: hubEvals new minor version, hubPredEvalsData v1.1.0 (with Sprint C changes), Docker rebuild (with hubData oracle fetching).

**Sprint D — Definition of Done:**

> - [ ] Issues #99–#102 each refined and resolved via TDD before PR #103 is merged

Reviewer 2: this is not really necessary and some have been tackled already

> - [ ] PR #103: each open issue has a failing test written first; hand-computed expected values for CRPS and energy score are confirmed correct before the implementation is accepted

Reviewer 2: While I already have addressed this in the PR. I have commented already there on the fact that hand computing metrics is not the job of our software tests, those are scoringutils tests. We don't write tests for the behaviour of every function from other packages we use.

Reviewer: Let us know if there is concern here we use a mix of our own tests and fall back on scoringRules tests for the same reason.

> - [ ] hubEvals: failing test for `score_model_out()` with `output_type = "sample"` returning the expected variogram score is written against energy score first (interim), then updated when scoringutils#1114 lands — written before implementation is touched

Reviewer 2: Not sure what is meant here

Author: updated.

> - [ ] hubPredEvalsData: issue for sample output type support is refined to specify exact config fields and error conditions → failing R tests written → `utils-metrics.R` and `generate_eval_data.R` implemented. Tests: `get_standard_metrics("sample")` returns expected names; `generate_eval_data()` with `joint_across: location` produces correct `scores.csv`

Reviewer 2: Which issue is this refering to?

### What do we already know?

**The hubverse evaluation pipeline (4 repos):**

```
hubEvals (R pkg)
  └── core scoring library; wraps scoringutils; exposes score_model_out()
      ↓
hubPredEvalsData (R pkg)
  └── orchestrates scoring for a hub; reads predevals-config.yml;
      outputs scores.csv files organized by target/eval_set/disaggregate_by
      ↓
hubPredEvalsData-docker
  └── Docker container wrapping hubPredEvalsData::generate_eval_data();
      used in hub CI/CD pipelines
      ↓
predevals (JavaScript)
  └── client-side module that reads the scores CSV files and renders
      interactive tables, heatmaps, and line plots
```

Repos:

> - [hubEvals](https://github.com/Infectious-Disease-Modeling-Hubs/hubEvals)

Reviewer 3: Organization name is out of date

- **Issue #44 (human-readable target names)**: ~~Is [hubPredEvalsData#21](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubPredEvalsData/issues/21) resolved? If not, #44 has an unresolved upstream dependency.~~ **Resolved**: Issue #21 is not resolved so there is an upstream dependency.
- **Issue #4 (default sort column)**: ~~Should this be configured in `predevals-config.yml` (schema change) or via a standalone predevals options object (JS only)?~~ **Resolved**: configure in `predevals-config.yml` as a schema change; included in Sprint B's v1.1.0 schema bump.
- **Which scoringutils metrics are already surfaceable?** For quantile forecasts, any metric in `scoringutils::get_metrics(scoringutils::example_quantile)` is already available via the existing `get_standard_metrics()` pathway — no schema or code changes needed, just config. For sample forecasts, once PR #103 merges, CRPS/bias/DSS/energy score become available the same way. New scoringutils defaults propagate automatically.

> - **What happens when hubs have multiple output types for the same target?** Sometimes, who output types might enable multiple scores to be shown, or the same score to be calculated in different ways. How do we support this? or allow users to specify which output-type to use when calculating metrics? or just set defaults for prioritizing one output-type over another? This may already happen for example if we have quantile with output_type_id == 0.50 (median) forecasts and point forecasts - they both could be used to compute point forecast metrics. 

Reviewer 4: Not sure what "who output types" was supposed to be. Might be at typo?

- Marginal scoring (CRPS, bias, DSS) and compound/multivariate scoring (energy score) via `compound_taskid_set`
- Dynamically generates compound metric list from scoringutils — so variogram score will be picked up automatically once [scoringutils#1114](https://github.com/epiforecasts/scoringutils/issues/1114) lands and bumps the default metrics
- Requires scoringutils ≥ 2.1.2.9000
- Open issues on the branch: [#99](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubEvals/issues/99) (NaN/Inf validation), [#100](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubEvals/issues/100) (test updates), [#101](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubEvals/issues/101) (compound_taskid_set validation), [#102](https://github.com/hubverse-org/hubEvals/issues/102) (test warnings)

**Action**: Review and merge PR #103; track scoringutils#1114 for variogram score availability.

**hubPredEvalsData changes** (extends v1.1.0 schema from Sprint B or adds v1.2.0):
- Add `compound_taskid_set` optional property to target config
- Add `"variogram_score"` as a recognized metric name for sample output types
- `R/utils-metrics.R` — add `sample = "variogram_score"` case in `get_standard_metrics()`

> - `R/generate_eval_data.R` — extract and propagate `compound_taskid_set`; ensure slignment between disaggregation levels and compound metric variables. E.g., if `location` is not in the `compound_taskid_set` this implies that forecasts are joint across locations which implies that we should skip location-based disaggregation for compound metrics.

Reviewer 3: Alignment is misspelled here

**Action**: Review and merge PR #103; track scoringutils#1114 for variogram score availability.

**hubPredEvalsData changes** (extends v1.1.0 schema from Sprint B or adds v1.2.0):
- Add `compound_taskid_set` optional property to target config
- Add `"variogram_score"` as a recognized metric name for sample output types
- `R/utils-metrics.R` — add `sample = "variogram_score"` case in `get_standard_metrics()`

> - `R/generate_eval_data.R` — extract and propagate `compound_taskid_set`; skip location-based disaggregation for compound metrics when `compound_taskid_set = "location"`

Reviewer 3: If location is in the compound task id set (i.e., it is not joint across location), location-based disaggregation should be allowed for compound metrics.

I'm guessing this was a mistake introduced when updating the variable `joint_across` to `compound_taskid_set`, but it's important to remember the two are complements of each other
